---
slug: achieving-clarity-of-thought
date: '2018-11-29'
title: 'Achieving clarity of thought'
description:
  'Achieving clarity of thought can be immensely difficult at times, it
  apparently seems the most difficult to achieve when we need it the most.'
categories: ['productivity']
redirects:
  - '/thoughts/achieving-clarity-of-thought'
---

Achieving clarity of thought can be immensely difficult at times, it apparently
seems the most difficult to achieve when we need it the most. If you are feeling
overwhelmed by your thoughts right now it's ok, take a few breaths, count to 10
and work through the following steps.

## What is your overarching goal?

A muddy mind can often be caused when striving towards something and feeling as
though you are not moving any closer to the goal you are trying to achieve. Take
a moment now to think about what it is you are trying to achieve, what is the
overarching goal?

### Scale your goal back

To remove the feeling of being overwhelmed understand that 'Rome wasn't built in
a day'. You may want to run a marathon and find you are frustrated because you
can only run continuously for a mile. From that you may possibly enter into a
spiralling cycle of self doubt and negativity, even worse you may start to feel
feelings of anger or jealousy towards people running past you or people who have
already completed a marathon. It's ok to have these thoughts and feel this way
but you need to bring yourself back to a state of calm where you are balanced in
your own emotional state.

## The next meaningful step

Now take your initial overarching goal and think about the smallest
**meaningful** step towards this goal. What is meaningful will vary from person
to person, all that is important at this point is what is meaningful to you.
That being said your next meaningful step should be more molehill than mountain,
it should be something that is achievable in a relatively short period of time.

**The next meaningful step is now your goal.** Focus you mind on this meaningful
step towards your aim or goal and let it become the only focus in your mind.
It's ok to be aware of the overarching goal but try to see the next meaningful
step as the only current priority. This should hopefully allow you to remove
some if not all of the emotional baggage that come's with wanting to achieve
something that is massively out of our reach.

## Break it down into tasks

Now that the problem has been reduced in scope and your goal much smaller in
size, working out what needs to be completed to achieve said goal should be much
easier. It's time to break the goal down further and work out what needs to be
done to complete the next goal. Think about the steps to complete your goal, the
steps shouldn't be too small that they can be completed in minutes but shouldn't
be so big that you become overwhelmed again.

You should find that the goal can be broken down in to around 5 or less steps to
completion, if it's any more than that you may want to consider revisiting the
next meaningful step part of this exercise and reducing the size/scope of your
next meaningful step.

### Completing the tasks

You may be tempted to start putting deadlines on your tasks e.g I will complete
this by Tuesday, that by Thursday and will be finished by next Monday. I urge
you not to do this, in my experience all that will happen is you will find
yourself repeatedly putting things of to the last minute, which eventually leads
to missed targets and a bombardment of negativity that will surely follow.

Instead, try to think about timed actions that you will complete which will lead
to completion e.g I will spend 30 minutes working on x each day. There is some
element of risk involved (as with anything) that you will miss a day, but
missing one 30 minute session will not be as detrimental as missing the target
completely. You will often find that after each 30 minutes you are 'in the zone'
and will carry on for longer.

By setting such a small obstacle you will reduce the chance that you will
procrastinate in order to avoid attempting the obstacle at all.

## Keep the Goal in mind

It can be easy to start working on a task an end up forgetting about the goal
you are working towards, this is not helpful. Put steps in place to ensure that
you do not forget why you are doing what you are doing.

It may help to have a dedicated place for your goal and break it down by
overarching goal, next meaningful step and subsequent tasks. Then to set a
reminder to make sure you look at it every day. You could use Trello or a
notepad this is down to your own personal preference. But, you should break it
down in such a way that only your active 'next meaningful step' has tasks.

Here is an example:

- Overarching goal
  - Next meaningful step
    - Task 4
    - Task 3
    - Task 2
    - Current Task

## Rinse, repeat and reflect

Now that you have spent the time working through your thoughts you should have
achieved a much better clarity in your mind. Work on the tasks you've given
yourself in small, consistent, timed chunks. Make sure you reflect at regular
intervals to assess the situation and make changes as appropriate.

Once you have completed your current 'next meaningful step' repeat the process
above from start to finish to work out your next next meaningful step and task.
Then, keep repeating until you complete your overarching goal.

Hopefully this article has helped you to stop feeling overwhelmed and improved
your thinking about your goals, if it has or even if it hasn't reach out to me
on twitter and let me know!
