---
slug: 'building-digital-products-what-ive-learnt-so-far'
date: '2020-02-27'
title: 'Building digital products: What I’ve learnt so far'
description:
  'At the end of last year I wrote a post about how my main goal for the year
  was to work on developing and releasing digital products. This article is the
  first review of my progress towards that goal.'
redirects:
  - '/development/digital-products/building-digital-products-what-ive-learnt-so-far'
---

At the end of last year I wrote a post about how my main goal for the year was
to work on developing and releasing digital products. This article is the first
review of my progress towards that goal.

## Always reduce scope

I started with an idea and began thinking about the initial feature set for the
MVP. A lesson learnt the hard way, everything but the most essential features
should be considered tasks for later iterations. This has been my biggest
mistake so far, I thought about multiple features that would be required by the
end user and built ‘aspects’ of the features that were mutually required. The
idea being that this would serve as a base that features could be built from.
For example, users of my app can invite other users into a shared ‘space’. The
problem, however, users can’t (currently) do anything in the shared space 🤦🏼‍♂️ If
I was to start over I would focus on building just one feature that gives the
user value and launch with that.

The real life impact of this error is that the product launch is delayed longer
than it has to be. No launch means no customers and no feedback. I’m still in a
position where I don’t actually know if what I’m building will serve the people
I’m creating it for.

## Learning and personal development

Over the last few months my skill as a web developer has increased
substantially. My day to day work has benefited from the app development as I’m
able to complete the same tasks faster. I’m putting this down to an improvement
in my problem solving skills, I’m working on complex problems and constantly
pushing myself outside of my comfort zone.

I’m also starting to think a lot more about how to build relationships with
potential customers. The app I’m building is B2B so I’ve been spending a lot of
time on LinkedIn researching potential customers. To my surprise I’ve actually
started reaching out to these potential customers, sending messages to the
people I’ve connected with. I would never usually message someone out of the
blue, in fact I’m not the type of person to message full stop but I’m determined
to succeed in building a product that people love and that means finding out
what people want.

## Understanding how to ask for feedback

When I first started ‘cold messaging’ people I was doing it completely wrong. I
was being too direct “Hey, we’ve never spoken before have you got any pain
points?” I quickly realised this is not a good type of message to send someone
who you’ve never spoken to. This forced me to start thinking about the aspects
of what I’m building and how it is relevant to the people I’m messaging. My
messages turned into “I’m researching X problem area with the intention of
making people’s lives less stressful, is this something you’d consider having a
chat about?’ So far this approach has worked far better and I’m in the process
of arranging my first meeting, hopefully it’ll go well!

## You need to guard your time furiously

I lead an extremely full life, I have 2 children, I’m training for iron man and
constantly working on my side project on top of my full time job. I learnt very
quickly that there’s only so much one person can achieve in a given day. The
pursuit of my goals has meant that I have very little time for simple things in
life like watching TV. It may seem like Iron Man and building a business are two
things that shouldn’t be done in tandem and yes that probably is true. However I
would argue that my training is forcing me to look after my body which in turn
is helping my mind complete the work that it needs to do. It’s just a shame that
there’s not another five hours in each day!!

## Lastly, I’m thankful

None of what I’m working on this year could be accomplished without the love and
support of my wife. At the end of last year we sat down and discussed my plans
and she agreed to support me in anyway she could. I wouldn’t have gotten as far
as I have if it wasn’t for her. And for that I’m extremely thankful.

The next time I write a review of my progress I hope to be sharing a link to my
MVP but I’m realising more and more that patience and consistency is the key. So
even if I don’t haven’t launched within the next three months it’s not the end
of the world because eventually ‘brick by brick’ I’ll get there.
